We're at the Getty with Tom Cranston.
February 1, 2002, right?
Right.
Well, we just, we haven't, we chatted 10 years or so ago.
It's amazing, isn't it?
We were working on The Gentle Madness and you introduced us to the wonderful things that you are a custodian of.
It's my privilege.
Can you tell us a little bit about what you're doing now here at the new center and how your work has expanded over the last 10 years and the direction that you're taking with your work and
Acquisitions and that kind of thing?
Yeah.
Actually, a lot's happened.
A couple things.
One is actually, from the time I bought the wood collection, we've continued to build it.
And actually, at first we bought quite a lot every year.
Now we buy quite a bit less, simply because prices are higher and money.
There's a lot of money, but it goes less far than it did ten years ago.
I'm very keen...
And I've always been very keen to get as many great or major things as we can get.
And so I'm much more inclined.
We grow at a remarkably slow pace.
Sometimes we buy one or two things a year.
But if they're terrific, I'd rather buy one terrific thing in a sense than five things that are pretty good.
Because in a sense, 20 years from now, 30 years from now, long after I'm gone, it probably still will be possible to get pretty good things.
It will always be difficult to get the great things.
Since our collection is very small, we have less than, about 170 objects, that's pretty small.
These are manuscripts?
Yeah, manuscripts.
Illuminated manuscripts.
And these are, how round are these?
I prefer to buy books if I can, but we do buy leaves because
Essentially, everything we buy, we buy with display in mind.
Everything that we buy goes on show eventually and usually ultimately goes on show in some rotation.
So we want to be able to show things.
This collection is really about the history of manuscript painting.
It's a book collection and we're interested in the greatest variety of texts we can buy and the greatest variety of subject matter.
We really are representing, in a sense, the history of medieval painting.
Manuscript Illumination is the great record.
I mean, it's the surviving record of medieval paintings.
Fabulous.
Exactly.
Good, keep going.
Well, anyway, so that's what we do.
So, I mean, we're essentially trying to represent the great schools, the great illuminators, the great subjects where that's possible, too.
You know, I'd love to get a great illuminated Dante.
I mean, I don't have in my little list hidden away a great Dante that's available to be had, but you never know.
Great things come up that are not known.
And, in fact, a number of the major things we've bought in the last few years are things that we're not known or, you know, had been lost for so many years that they were almost forgotten.
Lost in what respect?
Let me just say this book that we're working on and we're talking about here today.
The subtitle is The Permanence of Books in an Impermanent World.
So I'm really interested in things that resurface.
Actually, here's a good story.
I can't tell you all the details just because...
But I'll give you the idea.
We bought about, I can't remember, three years ago maybe, a wonderful paleologian gospel book.
Great Greek manuscript.
I can show it to you.
It's a book that actually I had known about for many years.
When I first started doing this job, whatever, in the early 80s, you start making a list of everything that you'd like to have, of what's out there, what might come up, both to prepare your superiors, that this might come up and it might be expensive,
And also, hopefully, you find out what's happening with them and see whether there's even a chance it will come up.
An intern I had who was a Byzantinist, or actually wasn't a Byzantinist, but he knew the Byzantine material, said, you know, there is this great manuscript that's well-known among scholars, which is well-published, that no one has ever seen.
And I said, well, I mean, how could that be?
How could someone not have seen it?
Turned out, in fact, there's a monograph by Buchdahl and Belting, two of the great Byzantinists, about
about early paleologian manuscript elimination, which illustrates in full this fantastic book, which they had never seen.
That's unbelievable.
Yeah, very interesting story.
And what happened, turns out what happened is a Greek immigrant came to this country at the very beginning of the 20th century, as far as we can determine.
And probably around 1940 or somewhere at a point, he sold the manuscript to a dealer in New York who had it photographed, or somebody had it photographed.
And then the dealer went and sold it to someone else.
No one knew who.
The photographs got into circulation.
There was a curator at the Met who had a set of the photographs and allowed scholars to see them.
And from the photographs, it was clear that this was a major book.
But the book had come and gone so quickly that no scholars, as far as I can tell, had ever actually seen it.
And I believe that the scholar in New York had not even seen it.
She'd only seen the photographs because it was before her time.
It seems to have been before this.
Anyway, it disappeared into a private collection.
It went on to my list of things like, boy, this would be great to have.
I had no clues about it.
I had not a clue about where it was.
I wasn't even sure who the dealer in New York was.
To this day, I'm not sure if I know who the dealer in New York was.
And so I was on my list of things to do.
And I would occasionally ask a scholar, you know, you know about this book.
Everybody knows about this book.
Have you heard anything?
No one had heard anything.
And one day out of the blue, maybe four or five years ago, I got a call from a dealer in Europe who's a very good dealer, but who we've only bought a few things from.
They have illuminated manuscripts.
And we actually have bought a couple of great things from them, but they don't have a lot.
And it's not someone I see even every year.
They said, oh, well, if you're coming to Europe, come over because I think I have something that you really want to see.
And they talk a little bit about it.
Oh, how interesting.
And the thing is, Greek books of any quality, they just don't come up.
I mean, we have a few great Greek books in our collection.
They're all the big manuscripts.
He bought them a long time ago.
We bought a couple of very beautiful South Italian miniatures, which were painted by Greek artists in the 13th century once.
And that's it, a couple of miniatures.
That's all we bought.
So...
you know, the prospect, when any kind of Greek manuscript comes up, even if it doesn't look so good in the photos, I go to see it because it's something that's especially hard to come by.
So anyway, so I went over, I saw it, and, you know, I thought, oh, my God, I mean, I immediately recognized it was the book.
And, I mean, I was flabbergasted.
And, you know, it wasn't too complicated.
We just, you know, there may have been some issue about timing or something, but we got it over as soon as we could.
And we checked it out as well as we could.
I did find out who owned it.
Yes, you know, they wanted to remain confidential, but we wanted to make sure that there was no issue with the provenance.
It seemed all to be absolutely straightforward.
And so we were able to buy it.
And, you know, then we caused a great deal of excitement because there were all these people in the field who, you know, suddenly this book that everyone had known was available.
It caused excitement as an artifact?
How about the content?
It was a pretty straightforward content.
Well, it's a gospel book so that the content's fairly straightforward.
So it's the illuminations of that.
Yeah, it's the quality of illuminations.
I mean, at the end of the day, although we are interested in texts, again, we really buy for the images.
Although, because of the nature of the material, scholars of every, you know, we get art historians, we get economic historians, we get medievalists of every stripe who come to use the collections who are interested in texts or whatever have their own reasons.
We collect primarily for the art.
So this all started with the Olympics.
I'll start with the collection.
Is the collection that you have, I think that was 40-odd books, right?
That was the number.
140.
140?
Yeah, it was big.
And so, and you said it's now, it's really... Well, what we did is, I mean, we deaccessioned mostly non-illuminated.
The collection was not all illuminated manuscripts.
And...
I mean, this is the museum that bought the manuscripts, not some other part of the Getty.
And the trustees from the beginning were interested in building art collections.
So we kept those things that related directly to the history of manuscript illumination.
And other things, they were sold only when it was a situation that we wanted to buy something else that was major in the way of manuscript illumination, so that in a sense it was an equal substitution.
So it's actually something that's helped us add to the collection in a very significant way.
This may be unique in a museum of this stature, but maybe not, but you buy books for display, as you said, and you acquire books.
The motivation here is for display, not necessarily for scholarship.
Is that right?
Well, I think every museum acquires, any museum that acquires
Art of any kind is dedicated to scholarship.
But any art museum, and I think that's true of any art museum, too, any painting on the wall.
Actually, because of the book trial, we've had a number of specialists coming through who actually came to see particular paintings because they happened to be working on some issue having to deal with the paintings collection.
So no, I think we see ourselves as being a highly scholarly institution, and we do what we can to foster.
I mean, art collection is fairly actively published.
I can show you some of the things we've done recently.
But, I mean, we do buy to display.
And what you said originally, which is to say we're probably among the few institutions that buy to display, that's true.
Cleveland Museum, which historically has bought more leaves and cuttings than books, is one of the other great collections that has bought to display.
How about the Walters?
The Walters Display is actively their collection.
Wow.
And actually, the Morgan Library actively displays its collection.
It's not, I think they do it in a more low-profile way, but they always have illuminated manuscripts out, and they do wonderful shows.
And they actually do occasionally fantastic.
You know, they do, the last couple years, last year there was this big show on Jean Foyer, the French Illuminae, which was, did you see that?
Yeah, fantastic show.
And Roger Wick, the curator, there are several curators there, but Roger Wick especially, have done a series of great, he did a show about books of ours a year or two before that, which is fantastic.
Yeah.
So they do it in a slightly different way, but they actually display fairly actively too.
But we definitely, the Getty represents art from antiquity up till 1900, and essentially the Getty's medieval collection is the manuscripts collection.
So we haven't really bought in other parts of medieval up till now, partially because it's pretty difficult to put together a major collection of medieval.
And one of the reasons, one of the justifications for going into the manuscripts collecting area was by buying the Ludwig collection overnight, we had a real collection, you know, a collection that had, that represented, you know, chronologically the span of... That's a great story, your acquisition of that collection.
That's fabulous.
Very fortunate, yeah.
And, you know, in a way, we couldn't have done this without that.
I mean, I like to think we've bought, I mean, I can't be very objective here, but I like to think we've done well building on that collection
But the core of what we are as a collection is still the Lively collection.
The great Autonian manuscripts, the great Romanist manuscripts, the great Gothic manuscripts are things that couldn't be bought anymore.
For this new book that I just did, I have an interview on there with Herbert Tenscher.
Oh, oh, great.
And quite a great profile.
Great storyteller.
I have to send a copy of the new book to Tom.
I think you'd be very interested in seeing it.
Oh, I would.
I'll mail it to you.
Oh, yeah, please.
Anyway, one of the things Tentred says is that there are perhaps, and I forgot the precise number, maybe 200 illuminated manuscripts in the world still on the market.
Would you... Maybe 200 great ones or 200... Medieval manuscripts, I think you should talk specifically from the medieval period.
Well, actually, I mean, there are thousands that are still remaining.
The question is, how many would you want to own to display it?
I mean, when I say we buy... Literally, we're just buying a couple things a year at this juncture.
I mean, we're passing out... We're sifting through dozens of manuscripts that come up.
It's just that how... Are we talking about leaves or books?
Both.
Leaves.
You know, sort of a combination of good... At the moment, I have...
Actually, at the moment, I have from three different groups of leaves, but I just was talking to a dealer in Europe today, and he said, well, there are a couple.
Would you believe, did you hear about this book that's been discovered, blah, blah?
So, I mean, no, the books are still around.
I'll show you something that we bought last summer that, you know, was unknown.
I mean, actually, in the 19th century, it belonged to the Duke Dommal, one of the great, great collectors, great bibliophile collectors.
I probably saw his name, the Duke.
Dommal, A-U-M-A-L-E.
It's the Chantilly, Duc de Maul was the one who built the collection of Chantilly, Musée Condé, which is one of the great manuscripts collections today.
It's the one that has the Tres Reserves, the Duc de Berry, and Ingeborg Salter, and that.
So, but he had books in the 19th century that he didn't keep, including some that were wonderful, and we just bought one.
But it seems to have been unrecorded.
It was...
You know, I have no record of it.
What's your reaction when you hear about something?
Does this happen more often than what you do?
Well, actually, that was a funny story.
I was in Paris in last May early doing some research for this exhibition and seeing what was coming up.
I didn't hear a word about it.
I got back, and then I got a phone call of someone there who looks out for these things, and she said, well, there's this manuscript coming up that you've never heard of, and I went to see it, and it looks wonderful, and you must come and see it, and the sale is at the end of June.
And so, like, I've been back for two weeks.
I jumped on the plane.
I went over for a day to look at it, and I came right back because I was busy doing other things.
You know, and it was a fantastic thing, and I went through the procedures here to get the museum behind it, and we bought it at auction.
You're talking about exhibitions.
The one that you have here now has been getting some wonderful notices.
Oh, good.
I think, yeah, we're very excited.
Could you tell us a little bit about that?
This is reading.
This is a reading concept that you have.
Right.
What we try to do is...
What we do with our collection is we try to show it, as I said, aggressively.
We want the museum's visitors to learn about medieval painting and medieval manuscripts.
We try also to be very conservation conscious, so we do four shows a year.
We rotate the shows.
And we could just sort of randomly pick 20 manuscripts every quarter and just stick them up them.
And if they're beautiful, that would be fine.
But what we try to do, since manuscripts is also an area where people come to art museums, they don't necessarily expect to see illuminated manuscripts.
And for many visitors to the Getty, I think, they've never seen anything like this before.
It seems like if you tell people that a book is written by hand, you give a tour at the beginning of the tour, you say, I'm going to show you some books that are written by hand.
At the end of the tour, many things may have registered, but that won't, because it's almost unimaginable for people who are used to the cheapness of books and the fact that everything is printed and even the computer today, to think that someone would go to the trouble of writing a book by hand, or even that they had to.
So there are very basic things about manuscripts that you feel like you have to, that you want to make clear or surprise people of.
So one of the points of this show is simply to talk about what was a medieval book.
I mean, what was it physically, but also what was it in the culture?
How rare an object was it?
In fact, at the beginning of the show, you'll see
We put the sort of historically fundamental vehicles for the written word in one case, which is papyrus.
That's exactly what we're writing about.
Yeah, papyrus, you know, the manuscript, the printed book, and then an e-book, because the future is... I told you.
So you know.
No, this is what I'm writing about.
This is what I'm researching.
Oh, okay.
I'll be curious to hear what you think about this.
Is there a catalog of the exhibition?
There's a brochure, actually.
We'll get it up there.
I thought there might be something we could purchase.
Also, again, because we do so many shows in a year, we tend to do just brochures.
I mean, we do do publications, but that's a lot of catalogs.
So...
And if you look at the back cover, actually.
Look at the photograph, actually, at the back.
Part of the point of the show is that reading is ubiquitous today, but it wasn't in the Middle Ages.
And so the show deals with that issue of who are the audiences, you know.
How did you come up with that?
Well, actually, this is, I can't take credit for this.
An intern...
We have an internship program.
We get an advanced graduate student every year for nine months.
And over the years, we used to assign people topics.
More and more, I think, our interns are getting more and more clever.
They often come up with topics themselves, and this was her idea, and she worked on it, and we worked on it with her.
And it just seems to have worked on it very well.
So what we try to do is we try to show the collection in as many ways as possible.
We have an intern now who's doing a show
about the Greek manuscripts.
We have very few Greek manuscripts, but they're pretty wonderful.
And in a sense, it's such a small group that you can't do a show just on Greek manuscripts at the Getty.
So she's doing a show called Byzantium in the West, in which she will talk about Greek manuscript illumination and the way it was influential in Germany and Italy and different parts of Europe.
And it's very, very interesting.
And it'll include paintings because, especially in Italy in the 13th century, Greek style was very, very influential.
And we have a couple of fantastic examples in our collections.
So again, another thing that we try to do is we try to show books as part of an artistic culture.
So we will show manuscripts with photographs because here actually it makes an interesting point.
We'll show manuscripts with paintings because sometimes the painters and illuminators were the same artists.
A book painter didn't necessarily just paint books.
He might have designed stained glass.
He might have designed tapestries.
He might have made altarpieces.
So I'm very much interested in situating the book in a kind of artistic culture.
Do you emerge from this as a medievalist or a paleographer?
What's your background to come into this?
I would say I'm a medieval art historian.
Actually, my colleagues would probably say I'm a late medieval art historian because my specialty is we collect...
Anything that's terrific, that's medieval.
Anything that's terrific.
No, we try to.
I mean, that's what we try to do.
That's a great mandate, isn't it?
Anything that's terrific.
No, that's what they want.
We try.
Could you say that when you think of how varied the Getty is in so many different areas, that you are able to do, and I hate to use this phrase, the interdisciplinary approach, but you are able to pose.
We do, and we do, actually.
It just made me think.
You're saying, well, we've got these wonderful paintings over here.
We've got these manuscripts over here.
You might have some stained glass.
I don't know if you have any stained glass here or not.
Not yet, but I hope something.
But there you go.
So you'll be pulling in tapestries, whatever, to kind of get a cultural sense.
And it really works.
Actually, when you go upstairs, there's a terrific show that doesn't have manuscripts, but called the Grand Tour, which is mostly about Englishmen going to Italy in the 18th century and what they bought and what they saw and what they did.
And they've actually pulled together drawings.
They've actually pulled together some illustrated books from GRI.
That's one thing, actually, that we've done, is we've done wonderful shows where we put illuminated manuscripts together with illustrated books for the specific theme in mind.
And they have a wonderful collection of illustrated books.
What is GRI?
The Research Institute, Marsha, the library of the Research Institute.
So you might actually ask her about that.
We've done a number of shows with Marsha and their people.
And again, we try to... Well, you'll see.
You'll get a sense.
Some of their things are on view up in the Grand Tour exhibition.
And that's actually one of the exciting things about the Getty.
Although, you know, we started this collection very late.
It's a small collection.
In certain areas, it's incredibly rich, and you can put together things from different media.
You know what?
Let me show you something.
Don't move.
I'll come right back.
Come on.
Well, thank you.
Well, while we're here, it's a little toshka.
You're very kind.
Anyway, this is one of the great manuscripts in the collection.
Let me just write that down a little.
It's called The Model Book of Calligraphy by Joris Hufnagel.
It's probably in here somewhere.
And you say that's one of the great manuscripts?
Yeah, it's one of the great manuscripts in the collection.
And obviously it's all, it's these wonderfully naturalistic flowers.
So the crowd pleaser, the public, you know, loves it.
It applies to people like flowers.
Right, exactly.
And Hoeknagel occupied a very, very interesting position because he belonged to a culture of artists and scientists.
I mean, this is in a sense, this is the 16th century great period for the sort of emergence of botany and botanical studies.
It's the great period of these great printed, illustrated natural histories.
And it's the sort of cultural milieu.
I mean, he worked at the court of Rudolf II, the Habsburg emperor, who was a great patron of both scientific and artistic studies of his time.
He was an heir to someone like Durer, who made great nature studies at the beginning of the 16th century.
He copied him and he imitated him.
And G.R.I.
has a fantastic collection of 16th century natural history.
He's unbelievably beautiful and meticulous, engraved, illustrated text.
that will show you a squid blown up 20 times in great detail, or flowers, or different kinds of beasts and animals.
So we did kind of a focus show with this manuscript at the center, surrounded by these large, glorious, illustrated natural history books.
We have a wonderful Durer watercolor of an insect, which actually was copied by Hufnagel, which just happens to belong to us, so we had that in the show.
We had...
And we also have, Hoofnagel was considered to be one of the sort of seminal figures in the emergence of Dutch still life painting.
And we have some wonderful early Dutch still life paintings in the show.
So in one exhibition we did, which was about illuminated manuscript, we had illustrative printed books, we had watercolor drawings, we had Dutch still life paintings to try to sort of recreate this cultural milieu in the second out of the sixteenth century.
And it's a very fun exhibition.
You were saying earlier that
We started late.
You mean in terms of collecting manuscripts and— Almost anything, collecting almost anything old today.
What kind of pressure did that—or how does that make you innovate, improvise, I guess, as a collecting institution?
Well, it makes me—I can't speak for my colleagues, but I think actually probably in general there's a sense of the Getty that the pressure is to
museums are remembered or understood or appreciated on the basis of their best items.
I mean, the most beautiful, highest quality, most interesting things.
And so I think the pressure to sort of sift through and make sure that you're buying the things that people are going to still care about 20 years from now is probably the greatest thing.
And that's what I'm trying to do.
I mean, I hope that I can't be the judge because in a sense the audience is much larger for me about whether I'm successful or not.
But that's the goal, is for people to think, you know, at the end of the day, the Getty's one of the great collections of illuminated manuscripts, or the Getty's one of the marvelous collections of paintings, or one of the great collections of old masters.
I mean, all of us want to have a collection that at the end of the day, people say, well, you've got to go there, because they have these items that nobody else has.
So they have this group of things, which is a wonderful collection.
And another thing you said earlier is that I'm on my want list.
So you actually have a...
a list of, a dream list, maybe, of things that are out there.
Yeah, I think everybody, our curators have things.
But you must have an idea of things that are, therefore, they're available in other institutions or they're owned by collectors.
Yeah, institutions rarely sell.
So, therefore, you must have a sense of what's out there in private hands.
I see that as being part of my job.
So, trying to simply learn what's out there.
And the interesting thing is, no matter how hard
And there are ways to do that simply by knowing the literature of the history of art.
Anything that comes up as private collection, you go.
And sometimes it doesn't take a lot of difficulty to find out where something like that is.
But the amazing thing is, even in the Ludwig collection, he bought a number of major things that were completely unknown when they came up.
And in a sense, part of the hope for the future, as it were, is that those kinds of things will still continue to come up.
That's a great quote.
They could be in collections.
Oh, yeah.
Well, it's part of the fun of collecting.
I mean, in a sense, there's a certain satisfaction for pursuing something that you know is out there, and sometimes one of the greatest things in the collection I knew about from the moment I started the job, and I always hoped, and I'd actually been advised by some dealers that I thought, well, this may come up pretty soon, and it never quite did, and it never quite did, and then it almost did, and it didn't, and it went on for years and years, and it was about
It must have been about 14 years, and finally it actually really did come up.
Can you tell us what it is?
The Stammheim Missal.
Okay.
I mean, it was, in 1983, probably the most famous manuscript ever to be auctioned was sold, the Gospels of Henry the Lion.
Do you remember that?
Yes, I do.
Made like $12 million.
Yes, I have it.
And I desperately wanted to buy it, but the decision was made internally that because it was great,
treasure, German treasure, and the Germans, you know, it's really one of the greatest of all German illuminated manuscripts, because they wanted it very badly that the Getty wouldn't do it.
And its curator, because curators are all greedy, I mean, I was terribly disappointed, because it was really one of those sort of, you know, cramping out of things.
Yeah, exactly.
And after the sale, a dealer said to me, well, you know, it's a shame that this didn't work out, but I know something from the same period and the same place, and it's better.
Come on.
Which is what I said.
That was just the right response.
And, I mean, you have to judge for yourself.
It's a fantastic object.
And in fact, it was a book that was well published and well known.
It was even in some of the surveys of Roman Esgard, the Shammai Missal.
And he said, well, you know, it's still in the family.
It's been in this family for whatever, I don't know, six or eight hundred years.
Amazing.
It was in one family since the French Revolution, so 200 years.
It was in the monastery for 600 years.
Have you written anything on this?
Yeah, actually, sure.
This gets into the next... ...for two reasons.
One is, and this is one of the things I think that makes it very interesting to do what we do.
This is a manuscript that was made for the Monastery of St.
Michael, Benedictine Monastery.
in Hildesheim in the 12th century, in the second half of the 12th century.
For 200 years already, that monastery had been one of the great centers of art patronage.
There was a guy named Bernward, who had been the abbot in the early 11th century, who commissioned some of the greatest, the famous bronze column and bronze doors at Hildesheim.
They're among the great medieval objects of metal work that he commissioned.
And this book, which is now made 100 years after he died, it was probably the last great object from Hildesheim,
He actually has a portrait of him because he was in the process of being beatified.
So that was quite astonishing.
Anyway, it's a very richly illustrated book.
Fantastic quality, fantastic condition.
It was made for this monastery and had been in the monastery until the French Revolution and the secularization of the monastery.
So for 600 years in one place.
Wow.
When the monastery was secularized, the monks basically walked off at the library.
They probably shaved it.
Well, yeah, exactly.
Exactly.
And the Prince-Bishop of Paderborn, who was the titular head of the monastery and the most powerful political figure in the area, walked off to the greatest of the manuscripts, which was this.
Wow.
And it descended in his family.
This is all in this book, you think?
Probably not, actually.
I don't know if she talks about that.
But I can check out some of it.
Anyway, so it descended through his family, and actually, and that was the Firstenberg, one of the branches, the noble Firstenberg family in
Germany has several branches, but it descended through one of those branches, and we bought it from the family directly.
So we're actually the third owner of this book in eight hundred years.
Wow.
And if you think about it, the family did lend it occasionally to an exhibition, very often, but a couple of times, over the course of the last century, as the book became known.
And you got it.
And we got it.
And you, Tom Crindon, you... Well, I'm merely a servant.
Which is really quite... But that's part of the excitement of... So, but if you think about it, and this is the part that I find exciting, we put it on view for three months.
And actually, we bought it just before we moved here.
So it was on view at the New Getty, where the first year there were almost 1.8 million people, large numbers of people.
Probably by the time we had shown this book once or twice, more people had seen it in California than had seen it in the previous 800 years.
And one of the great things about, I mean, I'm a real populist when it comes to the idea of museums.
One of the things that art museums do that is incredibly important is they bring treasures, artistic treasures, which almost always had been available only to a narrow audience to the widest possible audiences.
And people often criticize art museums as being these very, very elite institutions.
But what other institutions make this kind of rarefied, precious, fantastic object
available to the widest possible audience.
Now, this raises a question.
Very interesting.
You mentioned earlier that Très de Deuverie, I guess.
Right.
Now, nobody is ever allowed to see that.
Even scholars can't go in and see it, isn't that right?
No, I know some people have seen it, but it's pretty difficult.
All right.
But when you say they put out a beautiful facsimile for people to see, but you can't see the real thing.
Right, no, no.
It's not the same thing.
You show them the real thing.
We show them the real thing.
Why the real thing and not a facsimile?
because the difference is very great.
Tell me, what is it?
Even if they make it look... I shouldn't... We're onto something here.
Yeah.
I mean, it's an aesthetic thing, but... I can't even say the other it is.
Here, sorry.
I just saw this.
Forgive me.
Please close the microphone.
It's an ecstatic thing.
We were talking about a facsimile.
I mean, I did actually once a facsimile from a great publisher who does a wonderful job and actually printed a facsimile
in ten colors.
Very, very careful and laborious and expensive in a lot of respects.
I won't name names, but a wonderful thing.
They did a wonderful job.
And when the thing was done, when the book was done, there was a kind of ceremony and a presentation of the final results.
And when they did the presentation, they actually brought out the real book and they brought out the facsimile.
But they put the two of them in different cases about ten feet apart.
They didn't put them next to each other.
When you compare them, you put them 10 feet apart or whatever, 20 feet apart.
No, it was in Europe.
One of our manuscripts was a manuscript in Europe.
And they really had done a wonderful job.
But the reason in my reading of why they put them so far apart was at the end of the day, you put a facsimile together with the real thing, and it's not the same thing.
Can you tell us what the manuscript was back then?
Yes, a calendar manuscript by Simon Benning, a 16-century manuscript manuscript.
And I'm not—and I think they really did do a wonderful job, and it's a—and they have a very—it's an operation that has great integrity, and they do—they do the best that one can do.
But at the same time, it's not the same thing as the original.
And as a scholar, does it mean something to handle the real thing as opposed to—or is it because it's mainly an aesthetic thing that gives us a certain love?
Well, I think at the end of the day, even if for technical examination of a manuscript, if you're trying to see an erased inscription or an inscription that's simply vain or difficult to read or the actual state of something, the surface, that's something you can get in a facsimile.
I mean, at the end of the day, an illuminated manuscript is something written on parchment, a very particular kind of material, a very particular personality and character in paper, which is what
facsimiles are printed on something quite different.
And as I say, I feel very strongly that the level and quality of facsimiles today is amazingly high and amazingly sophisticated.
It's still not the same thing.
It's still the difference.
And it's often the subtlety of those differences that matter.
In fact, a good story along that line is from the point of view of scholarship rather than display.
We bought this Boccaccio manuscript for the region.
I'm just checking to make sure we're fine.
We bought an early 15th century Parisian Boccaccio manuscript, something that was on my list that I'd wanted forever and ever to buy.
And finally, suddenly, it just, all the pieces came together and we were able to buy it.
It was incredibly exciting.
And it belongs to a group of illuminated French Boccaccio manuscripts in this period, about which a great deal was known.
And there were three major ones, and this was one of three.
One, we know, was made for the Duke de Berry.
One was made for the Duke of Burgundy.
But ours, it wasn't dead.
There were no marks.
There was no clear indication who it was made for, so we thought.
Anyway, a scholar who actually happens to be here in town at the moment, Andy Hediman from the University of Champaign-Urbana in Illinois, was interested in working on them.
I actually came out to look at it, and she discovered what looked like an erased signature.
And we went into the lab and did a kind of enhancement.
We photographed it, and I did a kind of computerized enhancement of the image to get as much of the signature out as we can.
And she could only identify the last three or four letters of the signature.
She couldn't see the whole thing, but had very elaborate and distinctive pen flourishes and condolences or whatever.
I mean, very, very elaborate.
There were lots of bits of it.
You just couldn't get the whole name.
She told me this story quickly the other day when we were both in a hurry.
What's her name, by the way?
Her name is Andy Hediman.
A-N-D-I?
Yeah, it's actually Anne Hediman.
A capital B period.
She's an A-T-E-D-E-M-A-N-N.
A-T-E-D-E-M-A-N-N.
That's a good story.
Yeah, it's a very interesting story.
Anyway, she somehow, using the last three letters of the name, tried to go through the names of all the people at the French court, because that would be the likely area of patronage, to figure out who it could have been.
And she came up with a series of names.
and tested them out, and then tried to find the signatures of these people, because she was thinking, well, it might be a court secretary or something, which is very clever.
And she found a signature, which she showed me the other day, that is basically identical in the sense that it has the C-H-E-T, the last couple letters, has all the pen flourishes, these very elaborate pen flourishes in the same way, little caddles, that this piece with the court official seems to have used routinely, and it practically matched what remained
the signature in our book so she has identified if not the originals a very early owner of the book and if we made a facsimile of the book and she was working from it she might have come across that and still wondered but at the end of the day sometimes she's going to have to handle the real thing or if she was going through a like a hill monastic manuscript type of microfilm she never would have seen it
I don't think.
Well, that's for sure.
That's for sure.
Right.
The one change that may be in the works that is a little bit different is digitization is a remarkable phenomenon.
And digitization allows you to see a level of detail that people have not noticed before.
And sometimes when I look at a digitized detail of one of our own manuscripts, I will see things that I didn't see from just down there staring at it.
So I'm not opposed to sort of photography or digitization
But usually at some point you need to actually go back to the manuscript and work with her.
That's a great story.
Do I have on the tape the name of that manuscript?
It's called On the Lives of Illustrious Men and Women.
It's a French translation of a Latin text by Boccaccio.
Oh, Boccaccio.
That's terrific.
That's a terrific story.
It's a wonderful manuscript, actually.
Art museums are institutions that believe in the value of the original, of the aesthetic superiority of the original to the reproduction under all circumstances.
So, you know, it's simply... Yeah, it's showing facsimile.
In fact, we've had... I mean, you know, there are museums that do this, of course.
Right, right, right.
And in fact, you could... I think, actually, if we took facsimiles of our own manuscripts, which are of very high quality, and put them in the case next to a manuscript and lived them carefully,
You'd still be able to tell the difference.
Let me just say hi to Kate.
I'm very sorry that we've missed your Armenian exhibition, which apparently... Ah!
Oh, that's very interesting, don't you?
Oh, you don't want to hear all of this.
Thank you.
The book on Armenian culture is really extraordinary.
Probably, you know, it seems to be...
I'm not an Espresso star, I'm an Armenian, although we've done a number of shows now on Armenian subjects over the years.
And so I've learned a little bit about it through the curators that work on it.
But it really seems like for Armenian culture, the book is really the great cultural artifact.
And they are revered in a way, and panned it down from generation to generation in a way, with a kind of respect and veneration that even exceeds, and I think that's true of Western culture in general, which Armenian is a part of it.
But it's special.
It's something very different and special.
And when you think of it, there are people who lost their homeland, and how did they preserve their culture and their history?
Exactly.
That makes the book that much more important as a vehicle.
And one of the great things about books, as you know, is that they're often filled with really, really interesting descriptions and family documentation.
Great.
Why don't I start with one or two of them?
If you go around, if you want to go in and get started, I'll come in and join you and help you.
I'll be there just in a second.
I'm rambling, sorry.
Anyway, there is this kind of social veneration.
We have in Los Angeles a very large and enthusiastic, very interesting and diverse Armenian community.
We have another situation, again, because the Getty collection is so small, we have three or four manuscripts, most of the things we got from Ludwig,
Armenian manuscripts that didn't always have an obvious context in which to show them.
So we've thought of ways where there's a really serious community that cares passionately about their books.
We have an obligation to occasionally do some kind of an exhibition that will be interesting for them.
As it happens, UCLA also has a collection of Armenian manuscripts that they acquired 20 years ago.
I don't know the story very well, but that's an interesting story.
You might ask about that.
It's a great story, the Armenian collection at UCLA.
And they have one really great manuscript, which for many years has been disbound.
And one of the things that we like to do is show manuscripts that are disbound, because if you want to talk about a manuscript as a work of art, and you put it in the case, you see an opening, you don't get to turn, you know, the visitor doesn't get to turn the pages.
It's accessible, but only up to a point.
If you have a book that's disbound, you can, in a sense,
But by walking through the gallery, people are turning the pages.
They're getting to see the pictures as well.
And so to do, it's hard to find books that are disbound.
But one of the things, when I hear about a major manuscript being disbound, I see that as a really great opportunity to teach the public about books and about manuscript illumination in ways they never can.
Anyway, this book was disbound.
The Armenians were internationally on the verge of celebrating the 1700th anniversary of the founding of the church.
So we went to UCLA and said, you know, and the book actually needed some conservation work.
We said, we will do the conservation work required in this book if you will allow us to show.